>> Scott Moss: We left off talking about
static pages and how to determine what
is a static page according to Next JS and
a little widget you get down here.
We're gonna move into dynamic land and
start working on more app-like features.
So the signed in experience,
starting with the actual auth
pages that allow you to sign in.
So, you've done this before, you've
created forms, you've submitted data to
the server, you probably know this
pattern through and thorough.
How to make a form, how to have
controlled inputs using useState or
some form Hook or something like that,
and then submit that.
If you're an OG, you just go ahead and
call Fetch on submit or
something, prevent your default,
do your stuff.
If you're a little bit cooler, maybe
you use a mutation from React Query or
some TRPC, something like that.
We're not gonna do any of that.
[LAUGH] So
it's gonna be completely different.
We're not even gonna make an API route,
but yet
we're still gonna get
things to the server.
So, how are we going to do that?
Well, we'll talk about it.
So, Server Actions.
Anybody know what these are?
I guess technically now they're called
server functions, but same thing.
You ever heard of these?
Yeah, so new feature introduced by React.
It has little to do with Next.js,
although Next.js did.
When Next.js saw that React was
introducing this, they went ahead and
made it available in
Next.js many versions ago.
But now that it is stable in React,
it's stable in Next.js as well.
I've been using Server Actions,
or now server functions, for
well over a year at this point.
And I've also been quoted in a previous
version, of course, of being,
I don't know when you would ever use
Server Actions or why you would use them,
you should still use API routes.
Well, that time has come and passed,
it's the other way around now.
I don't know when you would ever
use API routes at this point.
Well, there are some use cases and
we'll talk about them.
But for the most use case, you're
probably gonna be doing Server Actions.
So, what is a Server Action?
It is a asynchronous function that
gets called on the server, but
usually initiated from some interaction.
So usually something on
the client happens, and
then a Server Action gets fired and this
is code that gets executed on the server.
Sounds like an API route,
[LAUGH] because it is.
You just don't make it.
It's really a clean syntax for creating
API route, so you don't have to do it.
From your perspective,
you're just making these functions, but
there is a network boundary type of.
There is an HTTP request that's happening,
there is some data that's being sent to
the server, you're just not
responsible for doing that.
That's essentially what
a Server Action is.
It's just a more streamlined way of
creating API routes without having to make
API routes.
You wanna cross the network boundary,
you wanna go from client to server,
you wanna post some data, you wanna update
something, you wanna create something,
even get something.
You can do Server Actions
to get things as well.
So we'll talk a little more in depth about
it, but I added some links to how Next.js
talks about it and how React talks about
it, but that's just how I think about it.
Just completely replace what you think,
like Server Actions,
API routes, same thing.
If you think about it from that
perspective, you're gonna be fine.
They also have access to the same thing.
They have access to the request and
the headers and the cookies and
things like that.
Because you are actually
making HTTP request,
you're just not writing the code for
the HTTP request.
It's kinda done for you,
if that makes sense.
>> Speaker 2: How does this work
with things like Capacitor, for
hybrid applications,
where Capacitor is actually serving
the client application through
a local host embedded in the device.
>> Scott Moss: Yeah, so, Capacitor,
like the mobile framework?
>> Speaker 2: Yeah.
>> Scott Moss: Yeah, okay.
So the question was,
how does something like Server Action,
Server Functions,
work with a framework like Capacitor,
whereas Capacitor itself is serving the
application on a local host on the device?
Because from my knowledge,
Capacitor is a hybrid mobile framework
that runs on the device through
an invisible shell of an app.
>> Mark: Kind of Electron?
>> Scott Moss: No,
Electron is like running Native.
Yeah, Electron doesn't need a server,
but Capacitor does.
Capacitor has a local host that's
running on an empty shell,
Native mobile app, right?
>> Mark: Correct.
>> Scott Moss: Okay, yeah, so
how would that work?
Well, I guess because you're
hosting it on the device,
so actually that's a good point.
Expo has, Expo,
what do they call it, Expo Routes?
Expo Router, there it is.
So, Expo is one of the first mobile
frameworks I've seen that's introduced
pretty much spec for spec.
Kinda like what Next.js is doing
with server side routing and
server components and things like that.
Capacitor, I don't think this is
going to affect that too much because
essentially Capacitor itself hasn't
implemented what Next.js has.
React supports Server Actions and
React Server Components,
but you still need the server part.
Next.js solves that by
giving you the server part.
Capacitor doesn't have the server part, so
you would have to implement what Next.js
implemented for Capacitor for
it to take advantage of it.
So you wouldn't see any benefit from
Capacitor for React Server Components.
Although, if you did have that,
something like Expo Router,
then yeah, you can see those benefits.
And I think you kinda already
get this with Capacitor, but
you can have over the air, or I guess
server driven UI that updates without you
having to go through the App Store or
things like that.
But yeah, I think you wouldn't see
a benefit unless Capacitor themselves
created the mechanism that
actually supports the server-side
necessity of having Server Actions or
Server Functions, yeah.
Because if it's just running localhost,
then you don't have access to your
resources that you have
deployed somewhere.
It's the person's phone, and at that point
you might as well use whatever Native
modules capacitor gives you to
access the person's phone, so.
Okay, cool, let's do it then.
So we need to make a sign in function,
we need to make a sign up function and
a sign out function.
Let me just describe to you how
these work and the logic behind it.
Because I did abstract a lot of the stuff
dealing with the session stuff,
which I think has little to do or
nothing to do with Next.js.
So, I'm not gonna have you go through
creating the sessions and things,
although I will talk about it.
Essentially, what we're doing for
sign in and sign up,
it's email password, so pretty typical.
On sign in the strategy is take the email
password that the user gave us.
We're gonna do some form validation
here on the server with Zod.
If you don't know what Zod is,
it's runtime schemas.
So think of TypeScript but runtime, so
we can check a schema at runtime and
get an error or not and whether or not
some object is validated by that schema or
doesn't have to be an object,
but any piece of data.
So validate those inputs.
It's the same thing you would
do on API route, right?
You would have form validation on the
client, and then you should also have form
validation on the route for
whatever you're posting or putting.
So it's the same thing,
we're just doing it here.
And then, check to see if we
can find a user by that email.
If we can't, then, that user doesn't
exist, but don't tell them that.
And then, if the user is there,
check to see if their passwords are valid.
If it's not, user doesn't exist,
but they don't need to know that.
And then, if so, create a session which
literally just creates a JSON web token
and puts it in the cookie.
Because again, this runs on a request,
cuz it's gonna be a Server Action.
So it has access to the request object, so
therefore it has access to set cookies.
Just like a Server Route would
have access to set cookies,
this function has access to set cookies,
cuz it's running on an HTTP request.
That's a strategy for sign in,
sign up, more of the same,
you're just not checking, you're just
gonna see if that email doesn't exist.
And if it doesn't, go ahead and sign that
user up, create a session, sign them in,
sign out.
Just deletes the JSON web
token from the cookie.
Cool, let's do it.
So, let's hop into,
it should have a file here called auth.
There's two auth files, there's
libauth and then there's actions auth.
So make sure you are in actions auth.
You will not be touching libauth, but
I might as well give you a tour of it,
see why you won't be touching it.
This is where all the session stuff is.
I guess I could have called this session
and not auth to not confuse people.
But you can take a look in
here to see what's going on.
Pretty much nothing in here is related to
Next.js except for just this one thing,
which is getting a cookie and
setting a cookie, that's it.
Everything else is pretty standard for
anything in Node or
anything in Node at this point.
So, this is how you
interact with the cookies.
Everything else is just pretty standard.
JSON web token stuff
has nothing to do with.
Yes, question, Mark.
>> Mark: So
Server Actions is like Firebot.
>> Scott Moss: Yeah.
>> Mark: So Server Actions is
like Firebase Cloud Functions?
>> Scott Moss: So, is Server Actions
To my knowledge, Firebase Cloud Functions
are serverless functions which can
get invoked on certain events,
usually through an HTTP event.
So not quite, the Firebase Cloud Functions
would be more equivalent
to an API route in Next.js, and
not so much of a Server Action.
There really isn't a comparison
in JavaScript land.
But if you know other frameworks, this
would be something you would see in Ruby,
this would be something
you would see in PHP,
you would see in Elixir.
So actually a very common pattern,
it's just that we've never really
had it in JavaScript to be able to
execute some logic on the server
initiated from the client.
So, I can't think of an equivalent
thing that has existed since frameworks
came to be in 2013 or 2012, 2013,
that this compares to in JavaScript land.
But to other frameworks, they've been
doing this for a very, very long time.
>> Speaker 4: Would it be fair to say that
Server Action is basically an API route,
but Next.js and
the React standard kind of implement
all the background details of
setting up that endpoint and
all that stuff, and
it's just more declarative?
>> Scott Moss: That's exactly right.
Yeah, and
I was just about to talk about that.
So, this directive,
this use server directive,
there's a lot of ways to use it.
We're gonna use it on the file level.
So by putting use server at the top,
every single thing,
every action that gets exported here,
is essentially a route, it's an API route.
That's what's gonna happen.
The compiler is gonna create an API
route for each one of these and
the route is obfuscated from you.
It's kinda like CSS modules, you don't
really know what the name of it is and
you don't really care, it's just a route.
And when that route gets hit, it's gonna
execute the function that is exported.
And that's essentially what it's doing.
So yeah, we can't beat physics.
So it still has to cross the network
boundary, there's no way around that.
So HTTP still has to happen, it's just
you're not responsible for setting up.
From your perspective, you're just
making a function and exporting it,
and everything else is done for you.
One thing to note is, because these
functions that we're about to make execute
on the server, that means they
don't have access to the window,
they don't have access
to things on the client.
So you can't do client things,
you can't do Dom things.
You will get an error, just like
you would in any server-side Node
code trying to access the window, right?
It also means you can
access things on a server.
So if you have an ORM, you have a
database, you have environment variables,
you can access those
things in this function,
which gets imported into a React
component on the client.
I know it sounds crazy, but the magic is,
this directive hints at the compiler
of what module bundle to put this code.
So, now in Next.js, when your code gets
built, there's a lot of different ways it
gets built with pages, but let's just
say you have two different bundles.
You have client-side modules, and
then you have server-side modules.
If in this file we're doing all this Node
stuff that will not work in a browser and
we import one of these functions into a
component that gets bundled on the client,
that would break,
because you can't do FS on the browser.
And if this thing used FS,
it would break, right?
So they have to separate those.
There's two separate bundles.
There's the server modules and
then there's the client modules.
And the code that you use for Server
Actions are going to be server modules.
So you have access to
everything on your server, and
you don't have to worry about
that being exposed to the client.
Even though you might be importing
this function to the client,
that code isn't gonna
show up on the client.
It literally would not work,
it would break.
So there are some optimizations happening
through the use of intelligent looking
at these directives, is making sure
those modules are bundled together.
And that's some of the stuff
you get with Next.js.
>> Speaker 2: Can we configure the actual
local host and ports on the server-side so
we can deploy those server-side
modules on a server and
then direct the client to
reach to that API that
is created by Next.js so
that is configurable?
>> Scott Moss: I mean, there's nothing
stopping you from making your own custom
server, and deploying that somewhere else.
In fact, Next.js has documentation on
how to make your own custom server and
eject from theirs, and
then you can deploy that separately.
So yeah, you could totally do that if
that's a thing that is gonna be necessary.
I have no experience
doing that whatsoever.
I just know that it's possible.